I am Maria Prymachenko. Born
in 1909 in Bolotnia, Ukraine.
I am a Ukrainian folk art painter,
who worked in the naïve art style.
A self-taught artist, I worked in
painting, embroidery, and ceramics.
I am from a peasant family and I spent
the majority of my life in our village.
I attended school for four years, before
contracting polio, leaving me with a physical
impairment, which impacted my life and art. During
childhood, my mother taught me embroidery, and by
the late 1920s or early 1930s, I was a member of
the Ivankiv Co-operative Embroidery Association.
My talent was recognized by the artist
Tetiana Floru, who invited me to work
at the Central Experimental Workshop of
the Kyiv Museum of Ukrainian Art in 1935.
In Kyiv, I underwent two operations,
which enabled me to stand unaided. Also,
I met my partner, Vasyl Marynchuk, there. And
had our son Fedir Prymachenko who became a folk
artist and a master of naiveté. Both my husband
and my brother died during the second world war.
The 1936 First Republican Exhibition of Folk Art
featured my paintings. This exhibition was shown
in Moscow, Leningrad, Warsaw, and Paris.
I was awarded a first-degree diploma for
participating in this exhibition of folk art.
My works were inspired by Ukrainian and in
particular Polesian, folk traditions.
They include references to the natural
world and to fairy-tales. I also created
bold and expressive embroidery linework.
I kept developing my style, with paintings having
an increasingly vibrant color palette and a new
choice of bright backgrounds for her works.
I was awarded the Taras Shevchenko National
Prize of Ukraine in addition to
global recognition from UNESCO,
nations, cities, universities, museums, and
global artists and mindsets such as Pablo Picasso.
I died in 1997 trying to keep the most
beautiful colors I saw in my artworks.
Many of my works were burnt during the
Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Many museums that hold my art were deliberately
set on fire and many of my paintings were lost.
I hope the world can see
the colors I wanted to save.